I think throughout the history of the
church, heaven has been a preoccupation
of God's people. Many songs have focused
on heaven
because people through the years in the
life of the church have been loosely
tied to earth and so they have longed
for heaven.
I suppose even this time in the history
of the world around the globe where
Christians don't have it as comfortably
as we do, there is still a great
anticipation for heaven.
Most Christians, I suppose, through the
centuries could say with the psalmist in
Psalm 73, "Whom have I in heaven but
thee? And besides thee, I desire nothing
on earth."
That is the expression of the heart that
longs for God.
Much like Psalm 42 where the psalmist
says, "As the deer pants after the
waterbrook, so pants my soul after thee,
oh God."
The psalmist in that same psalm, Psalm
73 said, "Nearness to God is my good."
He said, "God is my portion forever."
Being preoccupied with the person of
God, longing to be in the presence of
God
was on the heart of Christians.
In fact,
the pure in heart according to the words
of Jesus in the biatitudes are promised
that they will someday see God
through the centuries. That desire to
see God, to be in God's presence, to
enjoy God forever. That desire
that there is nothing in the world that
can satisfy has been on the hearts of
believers.
But it's not so in this culture, not in
this society in which we live, in the
western world. We are living in a
society of instant gratification,
material comfort, and endless
indulgences.
And the church has become worldly.
Nothing demonstrates that, I don't
think, any more graphically than the
lack of interest in heaven.
Most Christians are to some degree or
another more interested in laying up
treasure on earth than in heaven.
They're more concerned with their
investments and their retirement package
and their own future on earth than they
are with heaven.
I suppose most Christians sacrifice the
eternal blessing of glory on the altar
of temporal gratification.
We don't talk about heaven much. We
don't sing about heaven much because
we're really not that interested.
The old song said, "Heaven on my mind."
But that's not really true anymore
because believers do not have heaven on
their mind. They waste their lives. They
hinder the power of the church and they
are consumed with fading things.
We could address this issue of having
lost a heavenly perspective from a
number of passages.
We could talk about Paul's words to the
Philippians in which he reminds them and
us that our citizenship is in heaven.
Chapter 3 20.
and that we are waiting for the one who
will transform the body of our humble
state into conformity with the body of
his glory. Or we might even look at
Colossians 3 where it says, "Set your
affections on things above and not on
things on the earth." Or we might even
study 1 John 2:15-17 where it says,
"Love not the world, neither the things
that are in the world. For all that is
in the world, the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,
is not of God, but is of the world, and
the world passes away.
We could even study the passage in James
where James says friendship with the
world is enmity with God.
You see everything connected to our
spiritual life and destiny is in heaven.
Our father is there. Our savior is
there. Our comforter is there. Our
fellow believers are there. Our name is
there. Our life is there. Our
inheritance is there. Our home is there.
Our citizenship is there. Our reward is
there. Our treasure is there. Everything
that belongs to us is there.
Consequently, Paul told the Romans that
they should be rejoicing in hope.
That the closer they are to heaven, the
more joy they should experience. I don't
know that we see that.
I see even Christians close to heaven
trying desperately to hold on to this
life.
But the preacher in Ecclesiastes chapter
7 and verse one was right. He didn't
intend it this way. But he was right
when he said the day of one's death is
better than the day of one's birth. And
that is true for a Christian.
And though he may have approached it
cynically, what he said was indeed
truth.
It is better to die than to be born.
Because to die for a believer is to
enter into a better place than birth
ushers us into.
The Apostle Paul understood that when he
said, "For to me to live is Christ and
to die is gain.
Therein he voiced his perspective."
And the reason we should have a longing
for heaven is because God is there.
And whom have we in heaven but him?
And whom do we desire on earth but him?
He should be our supreme affection, our
supreme love, our supreme desire. And if
he's in heaven, then heaven should be
the place we long to be. In first Kings
chapter 8, eight times it says that God
is in heaven.
And if indeed he is the supreme object
of our affection,
if he is our great love, if we love the
Lord our God in any proximity to loving
him with all our heart, soul, mind, and
strength, then we would long to be in
heaven with him. And we would say with
the psalmist, I desire nothing on earth
but you.
And whom have I in heaven but you? I
want to be there because you're there.
Not because my friends are there. Not
because my family is there. Not because
my relatives are there, but because
you're there.
This has a powerful effect on our lives
to desire heaven.
And frankly, we could wish that we lived
in a less comfortable culture.
We could even wish that we lived in a
poor culture. We could wish that we
lived in a persecuted culture so the
world would not seem so good to us and
heaven would seem so much better.
In 1 John chapter 3,
first two verses, John says,
"See how great a love the father has
bestowed on us that we should be called
children of God and such we are. For
this reason the world doesn't know us
because it didn't know him. Beloved, now
are we the children of God. And it has
not appeared as yet what we shall be. We
know that when he appears, we shall be
like him because we shall see him just
as he is. That's the attraction of
heaven. We'll see him just as he is. No
more veil, no more distance, no more
mystery,
the complete revelation of God.
And then John says in verse three, he
that hath this hope in him purifies
himself.
It purges your life to hope for heaven.
John Bunan
writing in that marvelous pilgrim's
progress which demonstrates such genius
in making the Christian life into a
graphic illustration or allegory
has a conversation between two pilgrims
who are on their way to the celestial
city which of course is heaven.
One of the two pilgrims says
to the other, "When do you find yourself
in the most wholesome and most vigorous
spiritual state?"
to which the other pilgrim says, "When I
think of the place to which I am going,"
Bunan understood that when he wrote
that, he understood that heaven on your
mind changes your life.
The living in a joyous anticipation of
the presence of God changes everything.
Sadly,
I suppose most Christians are more like
the cynical Mark Twain,
who when told about heaven, remarked
flippantly, "You take heaven. I'd rather
go to Bermuda."
A true and vivid longing for heaven has
many marvelous implications and many
marvelous benefits.
A true and vivid longing for heaven, for
example, is an evidence of genuine
salvation.
Because when a person longs for heaven,
you know they're longing for God.
They're demonstrating love for the Lord.
They're showing you where their heart
is.
And not only that,
where you see a
strong longing for heaven,
there is incentive to the highest
excellence of Christian character.
Why? Because anyone who loves heaven and
anyone who longs for heaven and anyone
who seeks that which is above and anyone
whose heart is in heaven is one who
loves to commune with the living God.
one who travels there in meditation, who
travels there in devotion, who travels
there in prayer, who travels there in
study, and that's a purging fellowship.
Furthermore, a true and vivid longing
for heaven is the truest path to a life
of joy.
Because if you're really living in
heaven and if all your anticipation is
there and you recognize that that is the
great desire of your heart, then you can
endure absolutely anything in this life
and never have your joy affected.
What does it matter
what happens here in view of heaven's
glories?
Furthermore, a true and vivid
anticipation of heaven is the best
preservative against sin.
Because the more heavenly minded you
are, the less likely you are
to stoop to the degrading level of the
world.
The more you set your affections on
things above, the less likely you are to
follow fleshly impulses.
Furthermore,
true and vivid longing for heaven will
maintain the vigor of your spiritual
service.
Those Christians who run slow,
those Christians who work little,
those Christians who make a minimal
effort at serving God,
demonstrate little regard for eternal
things.
Many of them work very hard at earthly
things and very little at eternal
things.
Why? Because they in their minds have
designed that the the prize to be gained
here
is more worthy of their effort than the
prize to be gained there. What a
deception.
You see, ferveny in service,
diligence in service, faithfulness in
service is related to anticipation of
heavenly benefit.
I ask myself that constantly.
What is the heavenly benefit of my life?
What will be the heavenly benefit of
that endeavor? What does it matter for
eternity?
Furthermore, a true and vivid longing
for heaven honors God above everything
else. Because when your heart is in
heaven, it's because he is there and he
is the supreme one.
The true devotion and longing for heaven
also repays God's goodness. You say, in
what sense? Well,
when we set our affections on things
above, in a sense, we have given back to
God what he's given us because his heart
is always set on us
and certainly ours should be set on him.
So when you want to find an evidence of
genuine salvation in someone's life and
when you want to find a motive or
incentive to the highest excellence of
Christian virtue and when you're looking
for someone who has true joy, someone
who can stand against temptation,
someone who maintains the vigor and
diligence of spiritual service, someone
who honors God above everything else,
and someone who wants to repay God for
his goodness, you're going to find
somebody whose heart is in heaven.
the noblest of all Christians, the
godliest of all saints, the most
virtuous of all believers are going to
be heavenly minded
and they're going to live in the light
of eternity.
So when we talk about heaven in our
study of the book of Revelation, having
come to chapters 21 and 22, we're not
just talking about pie in the sky. We're
talking about something that has immense
implications
for how we live our lives. And frankly,
we're talking about something that
should bring great conviction.
It does disturb me. I confess
that every single seat in this church
isn't filled and and uh people pressing
against the doors on the outside. It
should be enough to announce we're going
to talk about heaven.
That every believer would be here if he
had to paddle his own boat.
In some places in our world even today
that would be the case
where people have suffered much and
where they love God much.
And so as we come to the closing two
chapters of the book of Revelation after
all these months and even several years
of study, we come now to the subject of
heaven.
And my prayer is that it will rekindle
the fires in every heart.
the fires of preoccupation with the land
of glory which awaits us.
Let's get some foundational data first.
Okay.
Heaven is referred to 550 times or so in
scripture. Heaven is referred to 54
times in the book of Revelation.
The Old Testament Hebrew word is
samayim. It means the heights.
The New Testament word is
Uranus from which we get the planet
Uranus. It means that which is elevated,
that which is lifted up, that which is
raised up.
Heaven is the raised up place, the
heights.
Scripture simply delineates three
heavens. In 2 Corinthians 12:2, it says
Paul was taken up into the third heaven.
That's the heaven where God dwells.
That's the third heaven. The first
heaven is the atmospheric heaven.
That's the atmosphere around the earth.
That's the air we breathe. The second
heaven is the heaven of the heavenly
bodies, the planets, the stars, the
moons, and everything else.
The last heaven, it's the heaven of God.
It's the divine heaven, the abode of God
and angels and saints.
And people have asked throughout the
centuries, where is it?
Where is it?
We believe it's a place
because there are some people there who
actually have bodies.
Is that not true? Like Enoch who took a
walk one day and walked right up to
heaven.
And the prophet Elijah who went to
heaven in a chariot
and the Lord Jesus Christ who's there in
a glorified body.
And there's going to be a lot more
people there in their glorified bodies
because Jesus said in John 14, he went
to prepare a place for us. And someday
he'll come and bring us there. And when
he does bring us, according to First
Thessalonians, our body is going to be
transformed. We're going to get a new
body to go into that heavenly place.
It's a place.
You say, "Isn't it just a sort of a
spiritual consciousness?" No, it's a
place.
It's a place where the spiritual and the
transcendent glorified bodies of the
saints will dwell with the glorified
Christ and the holy angels.
Now, exactly where it is is not given.
We just know one one detail. It's up.
It's all we know. You say, "How do you
know it's up?" Because that's what the
Bible says.
In Revelation for example chapter 4
verse one
after these things John writes and
behold a door standing open in heaven
I looked and saw the door and the first
voice which I heard like the sound of a
trumpet speaking with me said come up
here.
So from where John was standing heaven
was up. In 2 Corinthians 12:es 1 to4
Paul says he was caught up into the
third heaven.
It's up. Now I know the next question.
How far up?
Well,
the moon is 211,463
miles. You could walk to it in 27 years
if you could walk 24 miles a day. It's
not that far.
Now, if we could just crank up your
speed a little bit to like 186,000 miles
per second,
you could get to the moon in a second
and a half.
which is really the better way to go if
you're going to take the trip.
At that speed, you could reach Jupiter
in 35 minutes and 11 seconds because
it's only 367 million miles away. And if
you could go 186,000 m per second, you
could get to Saturn in 7 in in 1 hour
and 11 seconds because it's only 790
million miles away. Now remember, you've
got to go 186,000 m a second to get
there in an hour and 11 seconds.
But you see, when you've gotten to
Saturn and you've gone beyond and you've
even gotten to Pluto, which is into the
billions of miles away,
when you've arrived at the very
extremity of what we know as our solar
system, you haven't even gotten out of
the front yard,
you're still at the very, very beginning
of heaven.
Because Alpha Centuri, which is a star,
is 20 billion
years away. The North Star 400 billion.
And then a star Balgeist
880 quadrillion
miles away. And by the way, it's big.
They have discovered it has a 200
million mile diameter.
And you want to know something? When you
get there, you're still in our galaxy.
And there are billions of galaxies.
And they say that our galaxy probably
has a diameter of 100,000 light years.
That's going at the rate of 186 miles a
second for a year.
And when you've gotten through our
galaxy, there are billions more.
So when we say up,
it is up.
You say, "Well,
must take a long time to get there."
Luke 23:43, Jesus said to the thief on
the cross.
In 100,000 years, you'll be with me in
paradise.
Is that what he said? Said what? Isn't
that amazing?
And the Apostle Paul said, "Absent from
the body, present with the Lord." 2
Corinthians 5'8, far better to depart
and be with Christ.
Though in a sense, it's outside the
created order as we know it. It's it's
in a different dimension than time and
space. And so it's a little facitious to
assume that it's miles away. But you
understand
that the great heaven of God is way
beyond the created world. And yet we can
be there in a split second.
In fact,
when the rapture comes, it's going to
happen in the twinkling of an eye. That
doesn't mean a blink. That's different.
Twinkling means the light, the time it
takes for light to refract off your
pupil.
And what do we know about heaven? Well,
only what the Bible says.
Ezekiel tried, we give him credit,
tried to explain it in chapter one. I'm
not going to read it to you because it's
you can read it yourself, but he talked
about storms and he talked about fire
flashing and jewels and metal and
glowing metal and living creatures and
bronze and spinning wheels inside of
wheels and
from verse four down through 28, he he
gave his best effort at describing the
indescribable.
And Paul went there and came back in 2
Corinthians 12. And uh sad to say the
Lord didn't let him tell about it
because he says he was not allowed to
describe it.
So Ezekiel is giving us a description
that's very hard to comprehend. Shining,
brilliant, blazing, glorious light and
jewels. Paul doesn't even get to tell us
what he saw. So the best look at it is
here in John's Revelation.
We're going to get the best glimpse of
heaven anywhere in scripture here in
chapter 21 verse one down through
chapter 22 verse 5.
This is a monumental text of scripture
then because it describes for us our
future home.
Now remember Jesus said in John 14 that
he was going to go away and prepare a
place for us and this is the place he
prepared for us. And we'll see how that
fits together in a moment. Let's turn to
chapter 21. And at least for tonight,
we'll take a shot at the first three
verses.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth.
For the first heaven and the first
earth, passed away, and there is no
longer any sea. And I saw the holy city,
New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven
from God, made ready as a bride adorned
for her husband. And I heard a loud
voice from the throne saying, "Behold,
the tabernacle of God is among men, and
he shall dwell among them, and they
shall be his people, and God himself
shall be among them." Now, friends, that
is enough uh for me to preach on for
months.
It is so glorious. But let me just give
you three features that come out of
these verses.
First of all, the appearance or the
vision of the new heaven and the new
earth. Let's call it the appearance of
the new heaven and the new earth. Verse
one. And I saw a new heaven and a new
earth. For the first heaven and the
first earth passed away, and there is no
longer any sea.
Now remember, as this chapter opens, let
me just give you a fast review. As this
chapter opens in the chronology
of end times,
all the sinners of all the ages, demons
and men, including Satan, the false
prophet, the antichrist, and everybody
else, are now in the eternal lake of
fire.
They are out of the presence of God and
the saints and the holy angels forever.
They have been dismissed into their own
disconnected, isolated place of eternal
punishment.
They are gone from the presence of God,
the saints and angels forever.
Additionally, the whole universe as we
know it, the entire universe, all the
way out to endless space through all the
billions and billions of light years,
all of it has been destroyed.
All of it has been reduced to energy.
All the matter that makes up the entire
universe has been reduced to energy.
So the universe as we know it is gone.
All the ungodly are gone.
And God then takes the holy angels and
the godly of all the ages and creates
for them a new universe
which is to be the eternal dwelling
place of the redeemed
and of the angels who worship God.
This is what Ephesians 1:10 has in mind
when it says the fullness of times
has come.
That is the summing up of all things,
things in the heavens and things upon
the earth. Ephesians 1:10. This is it.
This is the eternal state.
This will exist forever and forever.
Let's look at the verse. And I saw I
have to stop at that phrase.
That little phrase
is a technical phrase. It's been used
since chapter 19:1.
Chapter 19:1, I saw heaven opened and
then Christ comes. It's a very important
phrase because I think it is used to
take us step by step through the
chronology of the coming of Christ.
It is used when the Lord returns.
It is then used at the defeat of
Antichrist.
It is then used to introduce the
banishment of Satan at the outset of the
kingdom.
It is then used at the introduction of
the kingdom, the millennial kingdom. It
is used to at the opening of the release
and the destruction of Satan. It is used
to introduce the scene of the great
white throne. And it is used to
introduce the new heaven and the new
earth. It's a technical phrase that
introduces each of the sequential events
from the return of Christ to the
establishment of the eternal state.
I saw a new heaven and a new earth
following the Lord's return, following
the defeat of Antichrist, following the
banishment of Satan at the beginning of
the kingdom, following the kingdom,
following the release of Satan and his
destruction, following the great white
throne comes the new heaven and the new
earth. And there you have the sequence,
the escatological sequence leading up to
the eternal state signaled by the little
phrase and I saw.
What did he see? A new heaven and a new
earth.
Now this terminology is drawn from the
Old Testament. And I just remind you of
two scriptures. Isaiah 65:17.
For behold, God said through the prophet
Isaiah, I create new heavens and a new
earth. And so new that the former things
shall not be remembered or come to mind.
Be glad and rejoice forever in what I
create.
Then in Isaiah 66:22,
just as the new heavens and the new
earth which I make will endure before
me, declares the Lord, so your offspring
and your name will endure. And again
there twice Isaiah refers to the new
heaven and the new earth. And so John is
taking that phrase right right from as
it were the pin of the prophet.
What Isaiah had predicted is now a
reality in the vision that John is
having.
So there's coming a new heaven and a new
earth. And I say to you what I've said
all the way along. The earth we live on
is temporary disposable.
We're not to preserve it. That's
pointless. I'm not saying that you are
um indiscriminate in how you care for
the resources around you. I'm not saying
that you should wantingly pollute the
world and make life difficult and things
like that. But I am saying the idea of
preserving this world runs contrary to
the plan of God. It is disposable. It is
unraveling. It is declining. It is
winding down. The law of entropy which
says that matter is always breaking down
and tending toward disorder is indeed
occurring. And consequently, we are
living on a disposable planet. God does
not intend for it to remain.
The goals of all those who want to save
the earth, the save the planet people
are really wasting their time because
this one will be replaced by an eternal
new heaven and new earth. In fact, the
earth is not headed for an ecological
crisis. I want to take that burden off
your back. The earth is not headed for
an ecological crisis. It is not headed
for an ecological holocaust. It is
headed for an escatological holocaust.
Now the word new is important. It's not
the word nas which means new as opposed
to old. It's the word kinos which means
new in quality. It measures not the
timeliness of something being new or
that the fact that it is new on the
calendar. It is new to this period of
time, but simply that it is new in
quality. It is fresh. It is different.
There's coming a different heaven and
earth. Yes, it is new in terms of
chronology, but it is the point that the
writer is making here is that it is new
in terms of kind. It's different. The
quality of it is completely different
from the one we now know. And we won't
even have any remembrance of the one
that now exists.
God originally made the universe and the
earth, I believe, to be the permanent
home for mankind. And Eden would have
been his permanent home and he would
have lived forever. Except that men and
women sinned in the garden. Sin and
death entered in, corrupted the world
and the universe. The fall of angels of
course added to the corruption. The
earth became a place that had to be
destroyed. Decay entered in. It started
unraveling and decaying and ultimately
God has to wipe it out.
There will come a new heaven. Think
about it. A heaven with no more
tempests, a heaven with no more storms,
no more fierce winds, no more thunder,
no more rain, and no more demons and
devils roaming. And there will be a new
earth with no miseries of godlessness,
no longer smarting under the curse.
An earth whose forever hills will flow
with holiness and the river of salvation
and whose eternal valleys know only the
peace of the paradise of God.
This has to happen. There has to be a
new heaven and a new earth. Why? Back to
verse one. For the first heaven and the
first earth passed away.
That was described back in chapter 20
11.
I saw a great white throne and him who
sat upon it from whose presence earth
and heaven fled away and no place was
found for them. At that point we
discussed the fact that the universe
goes out of existence
when God gathers the ungodly at the
great white throne and then sends them
into the lake of fire. And because the
universe is gone, he has to create a new
one.
The heavens and earth that we now know
must be destroyed.
You remember how the Old Testament
prophet said, "The heavens are not pure
in his sight."
Job 15:15. That was true. Isaiah 24:5,
"The earth is polluted."
And consequently, the psalmist writing
in Psalm 102 wrote, "Of old, thou dst
found the earth, and the heavens are the
work of thy hands. Even they will
perish, but thou dost endure, and all of
them will wear out like a garment, like
clothing. Thou wilt change them, and
they will be changed. The old clothing
gone, and new garment will come." And by
the way, that identical passage is
quoted in Hebrews 1:es 10 to 12. Thou,
Lord, in the beginning did lay the
foundation of the earth, the heavens,
the work of thy hands. They will perish
but thou remainest.
Jesus said in Luke 21, heaven and earth
will pass away.
So because heaven and earth as we know
it, this whole and massive universe will
be uncreated. And when you think about
the creation of it, I mean, think about
the creation of a universe where you can
go 880 quadrillion miles, reach a star
200 million miles in diameter, and still
be in your galaxy. And there are
billions more galaxies beyond it.
Imagine that massive universe being
unccreated
and then in its place
a new heaven and a new earth.
You say what's it going to be like?
He only gives us one clue. End of verse
one. Just this is the only clue.
There's no longer any sea.
Hm. You say, "Is that a clue?" Yeah.
There's no longer any sea. That's all he
says.
Now, that means it's going to be
different because 3/4 of the Earth's
surface is covered with what? Water.
And you know something? I want to
announce to you that you're mostly
water. Did you know that
your blood is 90% water? your flesh is
65% water.
Um this then this world in which we live
is basically
a watery world.
There's not only water in the oceans,
there's water in the land.
And we're water and plants are mostly
water and animals are mostly water.
And the earth, did you know, is the only
place in the known universe
where there's water enough to sustain
man, plants, and animals?
Tell me that's evolution.
Can't be.
The sea is emblematic of a of a
waterbased
environment.
Man's existence is water-based.
You die if you get dehydrated.
So, what is he saying here? Well, what
he's saying is uh the new heaven and the
new earth don't operate on water
anymore.
Now, that's enough to tell you it's
going to be different. No more
evaporation, distillation, and
condensation.
new climatic conditions
and whatever we are in our glorified
form is not going to depend upon a
process that demands
consumption of water.
The new heaven and the whole new
universe isn't going to have to have a
whole lot of oceans.
Won't have to have any. It won't have
any.
So in our glorified form,
no water is needed.
You say, "Well, is there going to be any
water at all there?"
I might get thirsty even there in
heaven. Well, you probably won't. But in
Revelation 22, it says, "He showed me a
river of the water of life." That's the
only water. It's It's not the H2O kind.
It's the water of what? Life.
So whatever whatever the water of life
is is what gives us life. But it's not
the kind of water we know. It's not a
chemical called H2O.
You say, "Well, why does he say that?"
Well, just to point out that it's
different. And that's about as profound
a way to express its difference from the
physical standpoint as any way he could
say it.
Because if there's no water there,
there's no sea there, then life is going
to be so completely different than
anything we could even understand
in its glorified form. The eternal state
is totally different. So verse one, the
appearance of the new heaven and the new
earth. And I can't tell you any more
than that, folks, because that's all
there is there. We will be literally
raised. We will be literally given
resurrection bodies. We will dwell in an
eternally new heaven and earth that will
be based on a completely different life
principle than what we know now in this
created universe.
Now let's move to the second point. He
starts out with the appearance of the
new heaven and the new earth and then
secondly the capital of the new heaven
and new earth. the capital.
Verse two, and I saw the holy city, New
Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven
from God, made ready as a bride adorned
for her husband. Now, here we are
introduced
to the capital city of heaven, which is
the New Jerusalem. Now, you want to mark
something in your own mind. The new
Jerusalem isn't all there is to heaven.
Because later on in the chapter, we're
going to find out just exactly how large
the New Jerusalem is. It is even
measured out down there in verse 16 as
1,500 miles cubed.
But you've got a whole new heaven and
new earth, a whole new created realm
that is vast, that is infinite, that is
eternal. And in the middle of it, you
have a capital city called the New
Jerusalem that is 1500 miles cubed.
You say, "Are you sure this is literal?"
Well, if it isn't, I haven't got any
idea what he's talking about.
Because if you ask me to accept this as
something that's not literal, then how
am I going to know what it is? You read
commentators who say, "Well, he doesn't
really mean a real city." Well, what
does he mean? Says city.
And who is going to unravel the mystery
of what he means when he doesn't say
what he means?
Says here, "There was a holy city called
New Jerusalem coming down out of heaven
from God." So, you know what I conclude?
There was a holy city called the new
Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from
God.
And that's what John saw.
Notice the the holy city, new Jerusalem.
There are three Jerusalems really in
redemptive history. There's the old city
of Jerusalem, the historic Jerusalem,
the old city of David. the Jebusites
once occupied in the land of Palestine,
that city that still exists today and
can be visited. People live there.
There is that city, that old city of
Jerusalem, that um historic city. And by
the way, even as the historic Jerusalem,
it is called the holy city. That's
right. It is referred to in the Old
Testament Isaiah 52:1, Nehemiah 11:1,
Daniel 9:24.
It is referred to in the New Testament,
Matthew 4:5, Matthew 27:53,
Revelation 11:2. It is referred to the
historic city as the holy city. What
that means is not that everybody in it
is holy, but that it was set apart unto
God. It was set apart for divine
purposes. It was to be devoted to God.
But it's it's not that everybody in it
was holy or is holy or will be holy.
Eventually, it'll become the seat of
Antichrist's desecration
and the raising of false worship of him.
So, it's holy in the sense that God set
it apart for divine purposes, but
obviously nothing beyond that.
The millennial Jerusalem, which will
come during the thousand-year period,
will be holy as well because Christ will
sit on the throne of David in the city
of Jerusalem, rule with a rod of iron.
And so, there will be a greater holiness
to that city as Christ, the holy one,
reigns there and maintains order through
swift judgment.
But this is not the historic old
Jerusalem and this is not the millennial
Jerusalem. This is the eternal city. It
is called the holy city, new Jerusalem.
And this is holy not because it is set
apart to God.
Not because Christ is there, but it is
holy now because every person in it is
perfectly holy.
And so Jerusalem will have gone from a a
holiness by virtue of being devoted to
God to a holiness by virtue of being
ruled by Christ to a holiness by virtue
of being occupied only by holy people.
Everyone in it will be perfectly holy.
Chapter 20 verse 6 of Revelation.
Blessed and holy is the one who has part
in the first resurrection that takes
people to heaven.
Now, it's hard to imagine a holy city,
isn't it?
Certainly, Los Angeles wouldn't qualify
the world's cities. In fact, just the
opposite of being holy of all of human
society, the most unholy is in the
cities, isn't it?
The world's cities are pockets of
wickedness, pockets of unholy living and
unholy thinking.
The world's cities are the the real
symbol of decay and decadence and
immorality and crime, pollution.
The world cities are a swamp of sin and
iniquity,
corruption, graft, thievery.
From New York to Tokyo, from Los Angeles
to Moscow, from Rio to Paris,
we don't know anything about a holy
city.
But this city is the holy city.
The sinless capital city of eternity
where everybody who lives in it is
perfectly holy. The idea of a city talks
about relationships and activity.
It talks about responsibility, unity,
socialization, harmony, communion,
living together, doing things,
cooperating.
And I think uh the Lord is showing us
it'll have everything that a city has in
terms of people living together and
working together and serving together.
And the difference will be they will all
be godly.
In Revelation 3:12,
this city was first mentioned in the
book of Revelation. And the name of the
city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which
comes down out of heaven from God.
And he says it's promised to those who
are overcomers. But there is the same
description. It is the city called New
Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from
God.
Hebrews
uh talks about this. Do you remember
Hebrews chapter 11? It says that Abraham
was looking for the city which has
foundations, whose architect and builder
is God. What do you think he was looking
for? He was living for what? For heaven.
in chapter 12 of uh Hebrews verse 22 you
have come to Mount Zion to the city of
the living God the heavenly Jerusalem
where there are myriads of angels and
the general assembly and church of the
firstborn are enrolled in heaven and God
is there the judge of all and the
spirits of righteous men made perfect
are there and Jesus is there that's all
in Hebrews 12:22- 24
this heavenly Jerusalem where the angels
are and the saints are and God is and
Jesus is.
That's the new Jerusalem.
Abraham looked for that city and one day
went there.
And all of the saints that have died are
gone are gone there now. And they're
there in their spirits.
It's that city.
I think the best way to understand this
beloved is that anybody who dies, any
saint who dies goes to the heavenly
Jerusalem.
That heaven is the heavenly Jerusalem.
In fact, we could say that all heaven is
contained currently in the heavenly
Jerusalem
because the universe as it exists is
touched and stained by sin.
So until there is created a new heaven
and a new earth,
heaven doesn't fill all of infinity.
To put it another way, think of John 14.
And I think this will begin to pull some
things together in your mind. I know it
does in mine. In John 14, Jesus, of
course, was telling his disciples he was
going to leave. And you remember the
little talk he had, let not your heart
be troubled. Believe in God, believe in
me. In my father's house, what's that?
Well, my father has a house. And in that
house are many rooms.
I'm going get your room ready,
and then I'm going to come and get you
and take you there.
I believe Jesus left the earth, went
back to the heavenly Jerusalem,
the city who's who has the city that has
a foundation, whose builder and maker is
God. He went back to the heavenly
Jerusalem where there are just men whose
spirits are there and the angels are
there and God is there and of course
Christ is there. and he went back there
to prepare a place for us.
And someday he's going to bring us to
that place.
It's important then to see
that the new Jerusalem exists even now
in some form. It's really heaven. It's
where God is. And when a believer dies,
they go to the place the Lord has for
them.
But someday
when God creates a whole new infinite
universe,
that heaven, that third heaven, that
father's house, that new Jerusalem, that
city whose builder and maker is God
is going to come down and descend into
the midst of the new universe.
And it will be the home of all the
godly.
It'll be where we dwell because we're
not you're not saying I'm living on
Pluto and you're living over on Saturn
and somebody else is living over in some
galaxy somewhere. We're all in the
father's what? House.
And so we'll all live in the city. We
can just go anywhere we want.
But home will be the new Jerusalem.
All the glorified of all the ages will
live in that city because they'll all
live in the father's house where Jesus
has gone. And if he's gone now, listen
carefully. If he's gone there now to
prepare a place now, it has to be being
prepared in a place that now exists. And
the new heaven and the new earth don't
now exist. You understand what I'm
saying?
That's why the scripture is so clear
that the time is going to come in the
end when God creates a new heaven and a
new earth, a whole new universe and down
from him into that new universe will
descend
the heavenly city
coming down from God
out of heaven.
In fact, in chapter 21, look down to
verse 10.
He carried me away in the spirit to a
great and high mountain and showed me
the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down
Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven
from God. That's a third time it says
that back in chapter 3 and here twice
that this comes down. It it indicates to
me that it doesn't come into existence.
It just descends from God into the new
heaven and the new earth. That's just a
technicality, but I think it shows you
the explicit nature of the description
here.
The Lord is now preparing a place for us
in the father's house. The father's
house is in the heavenly Jerusalem or
heaven as we know it. And someday the
whole thing will descend into the
eternal state, the new universe. It is
from God. What does that mean? It's a
God kind of city.
It's a God designed and God made city.
He's the architect and he's the builder
and it bears all the marks of his holy
glory.
And I'm telling you, when we get down
into verse 9 and go through the rest of
the description here, you'll see what
that means.
So, the heavenly city will have already
been prepared. Jesus is preparing it
now.
And when he comes for his own, he's
going to take his own into that place.
And when the rapture of the church
occurs, we'll go to that place he's
preparing for us.
And that'll be our home. And we'll dwell
there
even during the time of the millennium.
We'll go back and forth into the earth
in glorified form and back to that holy
city.
And then finally, the holy city will
become the capital city of eternity.
In further describing the capital city,
John says in verse two, it was made
ready
as a bride adorned for her husband. He
borrows this magnificent imagery of a
wedding. Now in Jewish terms, there were
three parts to a wedding. First was
betroal.
And what happened? That's like an
engagement only it was real serious.
Families got together and they pledged
the two young people to one another and
it was a binding contract and it was
signed and it was settled.
There was a period when the the couple
did not come together physically at all
during the betroal
but was followed by a a period or an
event called the presentation.
Presentation was when the bride was
brought out
and presented the groom was brought out
and there was usually a week of
feasting. The end of the week there was
the ceremony. So you had the betroal,
the presentation, the ceremony and after
the ceremony was over you had the
consummation.
It is that magnificent imagery that you
see here.
The betroal took place in eternity past
when God wrote the names of his own
beloved in the lamb's book of life from
before the foundation of the world. The
betroal took place in eternity past when
God the father pledged to give to the
son a redeemed humanity that he would
choose.
The presentation,
the presentation occurred at the rapture
of the church when the bride was taken
to be with the bridegroom.
And for seven years,
there would be a wonderful feasting.
The end of that period, the ceremony
takes place. You could liken the
ceremony to the millennial kingdom, the
great celebration, the final great feast
as the bride and the groom are joined
together.
Then it's followed by the consummation
which would be like the eternal state.
So he says, I saw
the new Jerusalem coming down
and it's it's made ready as a bride
adorned for her husband.
It's time for the consummation.
Why does he describe the city that way?
Because the city contained the bride.
And so he sees it as the bride city.
You know, in the very beginning of God's
redemptive plan, you know what his
purpose was? To go get a bride for his
son, wasn't it? It was to go get a bride
for his son.
And he did.
And by the time you come to this point
in the chronology of Revelation, the the
bride is collected. All the Old
Testament saints are incorporated into
the final figure of the bride. All the
tribulation saints are incorporated in
it. All of those who were converted
during the time of the kingdom. All of
the church is is included. And they're
all in the bridal city. They're all
encompassed in the bride that God has
chosen for his son. And the city
descends with all the redeemed in it
into the eternal state.
Back in chapter 19, just briefly, verse
7, let us rejoice and be glad and give
glory to him, for the marriage of the
Lamb has come and his bride has made
herself ready. And it was given to her
to clothe herself in fine linen, bright
and clean, for the fine linen is the
righteous acts of the saints. And he
said to me, "Write, blessed are those
who are invited to the marriage supper
of the Lamb." And he said to me, these
are the true words of God. When you're
studying that in chapter 19, you realize
that not everybody who's at that feast,
that initial celebration, is part of the
bride because it says, "Blessed are
those invited." So, you've got a bride
and some invited guests. So, we we when
we studied that, we pointed out very
clearly that the bride is the church.
The bride is the church. And the picture
of Christ being joined to his bride is
the picture of Christ being joined to
his glorified church. The church is the
pure, faithful bride, never a harlot
like Israel. The church is the bride
during the during the presentation feast
in heaven after the rapture.
But then when the church comes down to
earth when Jesus returns and sets up his
kingdom,
you come to the full final ceremony of
the wedding. I believe then all the
saints are collected and gathered in
and so the bride becomes
all-encompassing
and so does the bride become
all-encompassing in the eternal state.
So here is the consummation
all things resolved in Christ. All
things resolved in the father and that's
what Paul points out in 1 Corinthians 15
where he says all things are subjected
to him. Verse 28, the son himself will
be subjected to the one who subjected
all things to him that God may be all in
all. At the at the final great event of
the ceremony during the kingdom followed
by the consummation, all the saints of
all the ages of all the ages can be
brought into the bride metaphor so that
it encompasses all of them.
So John then sees the capital city and
it is adorned as a bride because it
contains all the redeemed of all the
ages who ultimately are the bride that
the father has sought to give to his
son.
Marvelous.
And the new Jerusalem is a bridal city.
The old historic Jerusalem back in 11:8
was called Sodom and Egypt because it
was so rotten and so wretched.
The millennial kingdom didn't reach this
level of perfection either. And the
millennial Jerusalem was besieged by a
satanic rebellion according to chapter
20:3 and following.
So we're dealing here with a new
Jerusalem. This is the holy new
Jerusalem.
More gloriously wonderful than the
present Jerusalem as Paul calls it in
Galatians 4 or the millennial Jerusalem.
So as we look at heaven then through the
eyes of John in his vision we see the
appearance of the new heaven and the new
earth and the capital city. Then one
last point
we see the supreme personality of the
new heaven and the new earth. The
supreme personality. And I'm only going
to say something brief about this
because there's so much to say I want to
keep it for next time. Look at verse
three.
And I heard a loud voice from the throne
saying, "Behold,
the tabernacle of God is among men, and
he shall dwell among them, and they
shall be his people, and God himself
shall be among them."
Who is the supreme person of heaven? Who
is it? It's God. Whom have I in heaven
but thee? Psalm 73:25. And who do I
desire on earth but thee?
I heard a loud voice from the throne.
That's about 20 times plus that that
phrase has appeared. That a loud voice
has come out of the throne. Probably
some angelic announcer. And the
announcement is behold the tabernacle of
God is among men.
God no longer is a far off, no longer in
a different place.
Tabernacle is ske the place of abode.
the place where you live. This is the
father's house.
In the new Jerusalem is the father's
house and the father's house is among
his own.
Jesus went away to prepare a place for
us in the father's house so that the
father could come and live in his house
with all of us. Behold,
amazing
God is living in the same house with
men.
It's an absolutely unthinkable reality
to a Jew who wouldn't even say the name
of God because of fearful reverence.
And yet a Jew should remember Leviticus
26:11 and 12 says, "I will make my
dwelling among you. I will also walk
among you and be your God, and you shall
be my people." And though that had
historic import and historic
significance, that is nothing compared
to its eternal significance.
The Emmanuel, God with us is really with
us. Not just in human flesh, in the form
of Jesus Christ, but now Emmanuel is
with us in all his fullness. No more
veiled in flesh.
No more in a holy of holies in a
tabernacle or a temple. No more in a
pillar by day or a cloud a cloud by day
or a pillar of fire by night. No more is
God transcendent. God comes and makes
his home with us. Now this is the
father's house and we're all in it
together. That is the amazing reality of
heaven. Blessed are the pure in heart
for they shall see God.
That means according to verse 22 of this
chapter, look at it. There's no temple.
John sees a new Jerusalem and there's no
temple. Why?
Because the Lord God, the Almighty, and
the Lamb are the temple. In other words,
a temple would indicate that you have to
go somewhere to see God or go somewhere
as in the Old Testament to behold the
shikina. You don't need a temple
because you're in God's house.
This is so staggering that John's
listening to this voice and the voice
repeats this thing several times. The
tabernacle of God is among men. And then
the voice says it another way. And he
shall dwell among them.
God's going to dwell with his own.
And what the psalmist anticipated when
he said, "In thy presence is fullness of
joy. At thy right hand are pleasures
forever." is going to become reality.
When it says dwell, it's the same root
as the word tabernacle and it's related
to the term for shikina,
the very presence of God. Shikina means
habitation. Deuteronomy 12:5. He says it
another way. First, he says, "The
tabernacle of God is among men." Then he
says, "He shall dwell among them." And
then he says, "And they shall be his
people." It's it's almost as if this
thing is so mindboggling he has to keep
repeating himself.
God himself shall be among them. If he
had just said he shall dwell among them,
they might say, "Well, yes, uh in his
glory and and perhaps in a veiled way
because he's so great." And when he
said, "And they shall be his he shall be
among them." Well, yes. Yes, he's going
to move in their midst. Yes, we
understand that. And then he says, "And
they shall be his people." Personal
possession.
Personal possession.
And then, as if that's not enough, he
adds again, "And God himself shall be
among them." Haven't we already heard
that
God himself is the addition? God is
among men. He dwells among them. They
are his people. Yes, you heard me right.
God himself
Wow. God appeared in the theophanes of
the patriarchal time. God spoke to the
prophets audibly and personally. God led
his people by day and by night with his
presence. God showed them his glory. God
came certainly in the flesh of Jesus
Christ. And we beheld his glory. The
glory is of the only begotten full of
grace and truth. Evidently God who was
transfigured before them. In Matthew's
gospel 17, it tells about it.
God has come to believers in the form of
the indwelling Holy Spirit. God has come
in the form of the reigning Messiah,
Jesus Christ, in the millennial kingdom.
But this is God's presence like no other
occasion.
And this then is the supreme personality
of heaven.
We want to be there because God is
there.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? Who do I
care about up there but you? You're the
supreme one.
1 Thessalonians 4 says when the church
is raptured, we will ever be with the
Lord. That is the issue. We will ever be
with the Lord. It is being with God that
makes heaven heaven.
Father, Jesus prayed in John 17:24, I
desire that they also whom thou hast
given me be with me where I am. I want
them with me where I am.
What a prayer. And it is answered. No
intercessors, no mediators,
absolute communion with God, no fear, no
restraint because there's no sin.
Eager approach to his holy presence at
all times.
will be really in the presence of God.
That is incredible,
marvelous,
unimaginable,
but that is the promise of heaven.
Next Sunday night is going to be
communion. But I'm going to spend the
preparation for communion finishing what
I said tonight and showing you what is
going to happen when we are in the
presence of God in heaven.
Father, thank you for this great hope.
Thank you for what you have laid before
us.
Oh, Father, how
awesome it all is.
And Lord, we do pray that you would
cause us to set our affections on things
above and not on things on the earth.
We sap so much strength, so much energy,
and so many resources fussing about the
trivialities of this life
instead of investing our energies and
our thoughts in that which is eternal.
Thank you for the hope of heaven
which enables us to endure anything here
in the light of what is to come.
Thank you for the hope of heaven which
is the greatest incentive to excellence
in our Christian character which is the
truest truest path to joy which is the
best defense against sin. Thank you for
the hope of heaven which strengthens our
spiritual service and causes us to honor
you.
Help us to live in the light of
the glory to come
to treat very lightly this world
for there is a far more eternal weight
of glory.
May we hold lightly to the passing
things
and feel the true weight
of what is eternal.
And should there be anyone in our midst,
Lord, anyone who hears this message that
is not on the way to heaven,
we pray that you would save them by your
grace and turn their course from a
course to destruction
to a path to glory for Jesus' sake.
Amen.
You've been listening to John MacArthur,
Bible teacher with Grace to You. For
free access to all of John's lessons and
a listing of study Bibles and books
available for sale, visit grace toou's
website at gty.org.
John MacArthur and Grace to reserve all
copyright protection under applicable
law. Our copyright policy is available
at gty.org or and it includes
instructions for and limitations on
duplicating this digital file.